Authoring Gradle Builds section in Gradle User Manual (#26188)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/running-builds/introduction/build_file_basics.adoc

// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[build_file_basics]]
= Build File Basics

Every project has a build script that details build configuration, tasks, and plugins.

image::gradle-basic-4.png[]

Every Gradle build comprises one or more projects; a root project and subprojects.
Each one has a _build script_.

For single-project builds, the build file contains dependencies and repository information for the build and the project.

For multi-project builds, each subproject has its own build file, and each subproject will be evaluated by executing its build file.

In the build file, two types of dependencies can be added:

1. The libraries and/or plugins on which Gradle and the build script depend.
2. The libraries on which the project sources depend.

[[sec:build_script]]
== Build scripts

The build script is either a `build.gradle` file written in Groovy or a `build.gradle.kts` file written in Kotlin.

The link:{groovyDslPath}/index.html[Groovy DSL^] and the link:{kotlinDslPath}/index.html[Kotlin DSL^] are the only accepted languages for Gradle scripts.

Let's take a look at an example and break it down:

====

> [.multi-language-sample]

Author: I will do a seperate PR to snippet everything I've worked on thus far and have examples for both Groovy and Kotlin. For now, the PRs are already too big.

=====
.build.gradle.kts
[source,kotlin]
----
plugins {
    id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm") version "1.9.0"                      // <1>
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral()                                                      // <2>
}

dependencies {
    testImplementation("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test-junit5")       // <3>
    testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter-engine:5.9.3")
    testRuntimeOnly("org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher")
    implementation("com.google.guava:guava:32.1.1-jre")
}

application {
    mainClass.set("main")                                               // <4>
}

tasks.named<Test>("test") {
    useJUnitPlatform()                                                  // <5>
}
----
<1> Add plugins.

> <2> Add dependency location.

Reviewer: You use the wording `dependency location` here and in the settings file docs. Is there a reason you're not using `repository` (e.g `Add dependency locations` vs `Add repositories`)

    implementation 'com.google.guava:guava:32.1.1-jre'
}

application {
    mainClass = 'main'                                                  // <4>
}

tasks.named('test') {
    useJUnitPlatform()                                                  // <5>
}
----
<1> Add plugins.
<2> Add dependency location.
<3> Add dependencies.
<4> Use convention properties.
<5> Register or configure tasks.
=====
====

=== 1. Add plugins
Plugins are bundled tasks used to extend Gradle.

Adding a plugin to a build is called _applying_ a plugin.

[source]
----
plugins {
    id("org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm") version "1.9.0"
}
----

The Kotlin gradle plugin, version 1.9.0, has been applied to the project so that source code written in Kotlin can be used.

=== 2. Add dependency location
A project generally has several dependencies it needs to do its work.
Many of the dependencies will be used by the source code.

In the example, the link:https://mvnrepository.com/[Maven Central^] repository has been added as the location for all the binaries that Gradle will need to download to build the project.

[source]
----
repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}
----

> In this example, the Kotlin JVM Plugin, `org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm`, will be downloaded by Gradle from the link:https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm/org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm.gradle.plugin[Maven Central Repository].

Reviewer: Is this saying that the above `repositories { mavenCentral() }` causes the plugin declared at the top to come from mavenCentral? 

If so I don't think that is correct. The repositories defined in the buildscript only affect the repositories that the source code's dependencies are downloaded from. 

Plugins declared at the top of buildscripts are downloaded from repositories defined by the `pluginManagement` block in your settings file

=== 3. Add dependencies

> Dependencies are grouped in configurations and can be retrieved and uploaded from repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dependencies are grouped in dependency configurations and are retrieved from repositories defined in the `repositories` block.
```
`retrieved and uploaded` sound wrong to me. To retrieve is to pull dependencies from a repo, to upload is to push built files to a repo after a build. 

The repositories defined in the top-level `repositories` block is only for retrieving/downloading.

In the example, a list of dependencies based on configurations (how/when/where Gradle will use it) is added, including the `junit` testing framework, which is used to test the Java source code.

[source]
----
dependencies {
    testImplementation("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test-junit5")
    testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter-engine:5.9.3")
    testRuntimeOnly("org.junit.platform:junit-platform-launcher")
    implementation("com.google.guava:guava:32.1.1-jre")
}
----

In this example, the source code in the project will import the Google `guava` library which will also be retrieved from the link:https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/com.google.guava/guava[Maven Central Repository] by Gradle.

=== 4. Use convention properties

> A plugin adds tasks to a project.
> It also adds properties and methods to a project.
> 
> In the example, the `application` plugin has a method that can declare the main class of a Java application, which is required to compile and run the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A plugin adds tasks to a project.
It can also add properties to a project via an extension.

In the example, the `application` plugin adds an extension with a property that controls the main class of a Java application, which is required to compile and run the code.
```

I think we should probably use terminology that is conventional in Gradle. Particularly, it seems odd to say `the application plugin has a method`. The plugin itself does not have a method, but rather registers an extension on the project that does

[source]
----

> application {

Reviewer: I don't think this example compiles. We never apply the `application` plugin to this project so the application extension is not available. 

I think we should move these examples to a sample to ensure that they compile (and continue to compile as Gradle itself evolves)
